---
title: Official 2025 Non-Pranking Statement
description: A legally binding document affirming my total and complete non-involvement in April Fools' pranks—because apparently, I needed one.
tags: [april-fools]
categories: [Humor]
date: '2025-04-02'
---

It's no secret that I am a proponent for humor in the workplace. You can read all about my shenanigans in [last year's April Fools' post](/blog/april-fools-hires). However, this year, I've decided to take a step back. In fact, knowing the reputation I had built for myself, I even posted an announcement to my company so that everyone is aware and does not spend the whole day on edge, anticipating a prank from me.

> Hi everyone,
> 
> I, Quangdao "Q" Nguyen, hereby declare that I have not executed and have no plans to execute a prank for April Fools' Day this year.

Despite my sincere diligence, I still had a few people claiming to be suspicious of my statement. One person even accused me of posing a distraction while I orchestrated a global scale ruse. As such, I followed up with a signed affidavit, reaffirming my innocence. It accompanied the following email reply:

> Hi all,
>
> Following a wave of skepticism, I have signed and attached my formal declaration affirming my complete non-involvement in any April Fools' pranks.
>
> My lawyer at Chattenberg & GPTstein, LLM has personally assured me that Times New Roman makes this legally binding. Please govern yourselves accordingly.
>
> Best,  
> Q

You can [download the officially signed PDF document](/docs/non-prank-execution-affidavit.pdf), or read a [web-based copy of its contents](/2025-no-pranking-affidavit). Please note that the latter is not rendered officially using Times New Roman, and thus cannot be regarded as official documentation.
